Improve launch documentation (#1)
mhidalgo-rai/ros2_documentation: source/Concepts/Basic/About-Launch.rst

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :local:

Overview
--------

A ROS 2 system typically consists of multiple nodes running across different processes (and even different machines).

> While it is possible to run each of these nodes separately, it can get cumbersome rather quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While it is possible to start each of these nodes manually, it can get cumbersome rather quickly.
```

> The purpose of the ``launch`` system in ROS 2 is to provide the means to orchestrate the execution of such a system. This tool uses _launch files_ to describe the system and its configuration, but not limited to which programs to run, how to run them and which arguments to use for them. These descriptions are then executed, starting processes, monitoring them, reporting on their state, and even reacting to their behavior.

Reviewer 2: It might be nice to very briefly explain the difference between `launch` and `run` here with a link out to the `run` documentation. It's a very basic distinction, but might be helpful for true beginners.

> System descriptions

Reviewer 3: Much of the terminology is implicitly defined in this section, but I honestly feel like an explicit terminology section would really help me here with definitions of what at least each of the following mean in the context of launch files:
* context: I still haven't figured out what this is or when I should be using it
* event
* descriptions: What does a description do?  Does it back end create an XML file?
* actions
* conditions
* substitutions: Why are they called substitutions anyway?

(basically everything that is in an underscore here).

Moreover I think it would be helpful to either have, or perhaps link to, the simplest possible example of using each one.

-------------------

``launch`` works with _descriptions_, which, for the most part, amount to sequences of _actions_ executing in a _context_ or scope. All actions have side effects, which may be limited to the context in which they are running or extend to the larger execution environment (e.g. the local operating system). These side effects will typically outlive the context in which the corresponding action was run, which may be obvious for an action that changes an environment variable but not for an action that executes a process. Actions may also generate _events_, signals that are propagated through the context, that may be handled by _event handlers_.

Actions alone allow for static descriptions that act upon and react to the environment in predefined ways. For a description to adapt to external input, _conditions_ and _substitutions_ exist. The former are boolean predicates, used for conditional actions, while the latter resemble text macros, useful for dynamic action configuration.

> In a way, ``launch`` descriptions are not that different from ASTs in procedural programming languages. The analogy brings about an important distinction that is easy to miss when writing launch files using the native Python APIs: neither actions nor conditions nor substitutions are computations but descriptions of computations to be carried out on launch. That is how actions can be implemented as sequences of other actions -- launch file inclusion being the paradigmatic example of this.

Reviewer 3: I'll admit - I had to google AST...

Reviewer 3: I think this is a really important point and one I didn't get for a long time.  I might put this up front:

When writing a launch file with the Python APIs, you are not writing a Python program that will be executed line by line.  Instead, you are writing a description of a file it will generate.  (Or whatever it is you're actually doing - I still don't quite get how Python launch files work.  Maybe I will when I finish this review.)

Reviewer: Both good points.  Probably worth a link to: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree

Author: > you are writing a description of a file it will generate.

It's not the description of a file, but a description of what `launch` should execute. Parsing XML/YAML yields the same object hierarchy. Taking the analogy further, start a Python shell and run:

```python
import ast as pyparser
code = "a = 1; print('a = ', a)"
ast = pyparser.parse(code)
print(pyparser.dump(ast, indent=4))
bytecode = compile(ast, "<string>", "exec")
exec(bytecode)
```

Oversimplifications aside, `ast` is the result of parsing Python `code`. We can then compile  `ast` into `bytecode`, which is executable. That's what the Python interpreter does when given a Python script.

`launch` does something similar. It takes a `LaunchDescription`, which may have been parsed from XML or YAML, or manually crafted like one does when writing launch files in Python, and instead of compiling anything, it executes it (again oversimplifying, actually the `LaunchDescription` gets traversed and executing `Action`s in it pushes coroutines to an event loop).

So when you are writing launch files in Python, it's as if you were writing the ASTs that Python works with or the intermediate representations that `gcc` compiles C++ to before generating machine code. That's why it may sometimes be difficult and painful (besides lack of documentation, that's also a thing). You are working directly with the building blocks of a [DSL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-specific_language).

> In a way, ``launch`` descriptions are not that different from ASTs in procedural programming languages. The analogy brings about an important distinction that is easy to miss when writing launch files using the native Python APIs: neither actions nor conditions nor substitutions are computations but descriptions of computations to be carried out on launch. That is how actions can be implemented as sequences of other actions -- launch file inclusion being the paradigmatic example of this.

Reviewer 2: One of the things that still sometimes catches me by surprise is the order of operations for a launch - e.g. do opaque functions always run first in a blocking way, do other nodes in the launch description run serially or concurrently, how are nodelets composed? I think describing all of those scenarios might be a bit dense/out of scope, but maybe a brief discussion on launch flow and that you can also explicitly control the order of operations with events, etc. Maybe this is more of an advanced concept for this doc though.

Author: > I think describing all of those scenarios might be a bit dense/out of scope

Yeah, I think this belongs to `launch` documentation. Too deep.

That said, I do mention now that actions naturally run concurrently. That is, they are processed in sequence, one by one, but they may outlast that execution and persist alongside others. Dynamic node composition has less to do with `launch` and more with how dynamic composition works in general (ie. ROS 2 service based API hitting a container node).

For day to day use, a simple mental model to reason about these descriptions is one of two phases: a configuration phase, up until the description is fully constructed, and an execution phase, during which the description is acted on and until ``launch`` shuts down.

> Practical aspects

Reviewer 3: I might use bullet points here rather than a paragraph.

-----------------

> Launch files can be written in Python, XML, or YAML, and run using the ``ros2 launch`` command. Launch files can include other launch files, written in any of the supported languages, for modular system description and component reuse. Context in launch is in general not restricted to syntactical boundaries (e.g. files, groups) -- scoping is an explicit operation (see push / pop primitives), making variable propagation across launch file hierarchies the default. Launch files can take arguments which are put in context, making them available to substitutions.

Reviewer 3: I think it would be nice to link here to a guide to when to use each of Python, XML, or YAML.

Reviewer 3: "Context in launch": I feel like "scope" is the more normal word for this even though I know "context" is used in launch files.  I also feel like this sentence and the following one are making a lot of assumptions about people understanding context and substitutions, which I know were introduced above but I don't feel like I understand them well enough to parse this.  Perhaps this could be something more like:
* Launch files can contain other launch files (link to example / tutorial)
* Context can control <whatever it does control>.  Be careful however - unlike with many programming language, context isn't restricted to syntactical boundaries but is rather an explicit operation (link to example / tutorial)
* Substitutions can be used for X (link) and interact with context by Y (link)

Check the :doc:`../../How-To-Guides/Launch-file-different-formats` guide on how to write launch files.

References
----------

> The most thorough reference on the design of ``launch`` is, unsurprisingly, its seminal `design document <https://design.ros2.org/articles/roslaunch.html>`__ (which even includes functionality not yet available). [``launch`` documentation](https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/p/launch`` complements it, detailing the architecture of the core Python library. For everything else, both ``launch`` and ``launch_ros`` APIs are documented.

Reviewer: I'm curious what are those features that are mentioned in the design doc that are not yet implemented?  Do they sound useful?

Author: Well, markup mapping is incomplete, there is no verification tooling (which means introspectability support is underused), testing support is there but underdeveloped IIRC, there's no support to run processes anywhere but the host OS... I think that's all. There are old tickets in https://github.com/ros2/launch that point to improvements to the base functionality but that's beyond the design document.

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :local:

> Overview

Reviewer 3: Wow this makes a lot more sense!  Thank you!

  An action completing, a process exiting, ``launch`` shutting down, are examples of events.
  These signals have no inherent side effects, only those that result from actions handling them (if any).
  Events only exist within the ``launch`` context, but are not bound to any scopes.

Actions and events are the main moving parts in ``launch``, even if events are used indirectly more often than not (i.e. it is through events that the ``launch`` internal event loop is driven).
In addition to these, and to better leverage configuration variables, ``launch`` defines _conditions_, _substitutions_, and _event handlers_:

* [Conditions](https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/p/launch/launch.html#launch.Condition) encapsulate boolean predicates evaluated in ``launch`` context, and therefore in runtime.
  These are mainly used to define actions that execute _if__ or _unless_ a given boolean predicate turns out to be true.
* [Substitutions](https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/p/launch/launch.html#launch.Substitution) are string interpolation expressions evaluated in ``launch`` context, though these may also tap into the larger execution environment.

>   Evaluating a configuration variable value, fetching an environment variable value, retrieve the absolute path in the filesystem of an executable file, are examples of substitutions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Evaluating a configuration variable value, fetching an environment variable value, retrieving the absolute path in the filesystem of an executable file, are examples of substitutions.
```

Overview
--------

A ROS 2 system typically consists of multiple :doc:`nodes <About-Nodes>` running across different processes (and even different machines).
While it is possible to start each of these nodes manually, it can get cumbersome rather quickly.
Automation is also non-trivial, even if existing tools for generic process control and configuration management are leveraged, let alone crafting it from first principles (e.g. proper OS process management using shell scripts or general purpose system programming languages can be tricky on its own).

``launch`` provides the means to orchestrate the execution of ROS 2 systems, in ROS 2 terms.
_Launch files_ describe the orchestration procedure, including but not limited to which nodes to run, how to run them, and which arguments to use for them.
These descriptions are then executed, starting processes, monitoring them, reporting on their state, and even reacting to their behavior.

> Moving parts

Reviewer 3: Would it be possible to link each of the defined words to the existing documentation / tutorials for them?

Author: I don't think this is documented with this granularity outside launch API documentation. I can try though.

Author: Well, I ended up pointing to `launch` API docs in https://github.com/mhidalgo-bdai/ros2_documentation/pull/1/commits/1ecbbac0e4a1339cc85886fb9a60f50c9ede4214. It's the closest there is out there to a reference on these moving parts.

------------

> ``launch`` works with _actions_, abstract representations of computational procedures with side effects on its execution environment. Logging to standard output, executing a program, shutting down ``launch`` itself, are examples of actions. An action may also encompass another action or a collection thereof to describe more complex functionality. A collection of actions makes up the _description_ of a procedure that ``launch`` can take and execute. These descriptions are typically read from source files, so called _launch files_, which may be written in Python, or using specific XML or YAML syntax.

Reviewer 3: I really like this description.

> While the extent of the execution environment of an action depends on its nature e.g. logging to standard output is circumscribed to the ``launch`` process whereas executing a program reaches out to the host operating system, ``launch`` maintains an execution _context_ in which these actions take place and through which these can interact between them and with the user.

Reviewer 3: I think I could use an example of context after this before we start introducing configuration variables and events.

Author: Context is just the logical space in which actions, and ``launch`` entities in general, live. There are no various contexts. That said, I guess we could have an example where we explain where are the boundaries for nested scopes, but way down below.

Author: I expanded this paragraph in https://github.com/mhidalgo-bdai/ros2_documentation/pull/1/commits/1ecbbac0e4a1339cc85886fb9a60f50c9ede4214. Hopefully it's clearer now.

The ``launch`` context holds _configuration variables_ (i.e. state) and propagates _events_, both of which are available to actions and to ``launch`` itself.
Events are signals that originate internally in actions or externally on user input. It is through events, for example, that ``launch`` description execution (i.e. inclusion) is triggered.

> Configuration variables populate the ``launch`` context. It is through configuration variables, for example, that ``launch`` descriptions can take arguments before execution.

Reviewer 3: Maybe explain events and configuration variables separately?  And an example of each would be helpful - especially how an event differs from an action.

Author: Done in https://github.com/mhidalgo-bdai/ros2_documentation/pull/1/commits/1ecbbac0e4a1339cc85886fb9a60f50c9ede4214.

In connection with its context, ``launch`` defines _conditions_, _substitutions_, and _event handlers_ to broaden its scope of application.

> The first two are different forms of expressions evaluated in ``launch`` context (though they may also tap into the larger execution environment): conditions are boolean predicates, used to define conditional actions, while substitutions are string interpolation expressions that enable dynamic ``launch`` descriptions.

Reviewer 3: Simple examples like you do with action would be helpful for each of these as well I think.

Author: Done in https://github.com/mhidalgo-bdai/ros2_documentation/pull/1/commits/1ecbbac0e4a1339cc85886fb9a60f50c9ede4214.
